from https://www.reddit.com/r/AskElectronics/comments/cov5r5/mosfet_vs_bjt_vs_scr_vs_igbt/
-MOSFETs are controlled by a voltage applied to a control terminal (gate) which generates an internal electric field, that turns them on (conducting from drain to source). The circuit between the control terminal and common terminal (gate to source) acts like a small capacitor in your circuit. So when you turn them on and off you are doing the work of charging and discharging a small capacitor. MOSFETs are great at low/medium currents, very efficient. But they are like resistors when conducting. This means that as current grows, the heat grows with the square of current, which means that at very high currents they don't do well.

-BJTs (bipolar junction transistors) are controlled in a way that basically looks like the current applied to a control terminal (base) gets amplified, and this amplified version is conducted into the output terminal (collector) and to the common terminal (emitter). You will eventually learn that they are actually also controlled by an internal electric field. But they don't really act like that. Really they act like a diode is connected between the control and common (base and emitter) terminal, and you keep them turned on by pumping current through this diode. So to turn them on you have to do the work of keeping a steady current flow through a diode. They conduct more like a diode too, from the output to common terminal. So traditionally they were good for high current, because diode voltage is pretty constant and so the heating due to current grows just linearly (not the square like FETs) with current increases. MOSFET can nowadays beat them in almost all applications though.

An IGBT is a bipolar junction transistor, really. It just has a MOSFET internally placed to conduct that current through the base-emitter diode. So to turn it on you only have to do the work of charging the small capacitance which is the gate terminal of the MOSFET, and then the MOSFET does the continuous work needed to keep current flowing through the base of the BJT. Because of this IGBTs tend to beat MOSFETs for the highest currents. They have the nice diode-like output of a BJT, so good for very high currents, and the nice capacitor like input of a FET where you don't need to keep pumping current through it. Slightly less efficient than FETs at very low current and low voltages because you can't ever get the voltage drop across them below about 1V or so.

-SCRs are bipolar transistors that keep themselves turned on using another bipolar transistor. Probably the most complicated to use, or at least their use has the most restrictions. Rather than just responding to the control signal, what happens is that this second transistor responds to the output current. So what it basically looks like is that you have a bipolar transistor sitting there doing nothing. And then you give it a little pulse into the control terminal (gate) to turn it on. This causes a little bit of output current to flow. This little bit of output current immediately causes the second transistor to begin sending more current back to the control terminal. This makes even more output current flow. And within a microsecond or whatever, it's conducting as much current as it possibly can, since it's basically used this current that's flowing through it to turn itself on more.

This is nice because it takes very little energy to control absurdly massive currents. Its input looks like the BJT control terminal (like a diode) at the very beginning but then you can stop applying current basically immediately. So very easy to turn on. Very, very hard to turn off though.

[They actually can be turned off, if you suck enough current out of the gate. But only specific devices can be practically turned off when they're doing any significant amount of work. Those are called gate turnoff thyristors and basically aren't used anymore because the tradeoffs which make them able to do this also make them strictly worse than IGBTs or modern FETs.]

Worth noting that it's not actually two separate transistors, it's a four layer sandwhich that in a very subtle way acts like two transistors. You can probably save understanding this for later, after you've learned the physics of how a BJT works. Took me many years to get there.

Traditionally SCRs were used for high power applications like inverters and battery chargers, etc. But as soon as IGBTs or even FETs became capable of doing the same job, they were discarded, because they're sort of annoying to work with. Especially in inverters, where you have to get the damn things to turn off despite there being a DC supply continuously pushing current through them which of course keeps them turned on. This was done by a process called commutation, where basically a second SCR was used along with a capacitor to momentarily short out the first SCR, and then allow the second SCR to turn off after the capacitor had finished charging. Really, really expensive and annoying.

SCRs are still used in the very highest, highest power and current applications. Like 500,000V high voltage DC (HVDC) transmission line converters, and stuff like that. The fundamental fact is that it's very hard to beat what amounts to a rock that turns itself into a conductor, when it comes to pure brutal current carrying capability!

The SCR's cousin, the TRIAC, is still used extensively in AC control (lamp dimmers, cheap variable speed motors like Dremel tools and drills, etc etc). It is exactly the same in concept except it can handle an output current of either polarity. This one is even harder to understand the physics but functionally it's no harder to understand: a momentary control pulse makes it turn all the way on and stick that way until output current ceases. In AC control this is more useful than anywhere else, because AC current automatically ceases either 100x (50Hz) or 120x (60Hz) per second, so they don't stay on forever like they tend to on DC supplies.
